[SOUND] Well,
welcome to class.
Today, we're going to start you on your
journey of learning how to program
in Python.
Today's lesson is fairly straight forward,
you've probably seen some of this in
middle school, in high school algebra.
I'm going to tell you about how
numbers are represented in Python, and
then we'll discuss how to do arithmetic
expressions by combining these numbers.
I don't think it's anything
that's too mysterious here.
Kind of what you should think about
today's lecture is that Python is course,
just an over ground calculator.
We're going to give it some data,
in this case, numbers, and
we're going to ask it
to do some operations.
And it's going to, when it's finished,
give us an answer.
And so that will kind of consume
us through today's lecture.
Then I'll go on and we'll talk
about ways to build variables and
functions of things that
we'll act on later on.
Okay, let's go to class.
Before we jump into the details of our
lecture on arithmetic expressions,
let me show you about how we're going to
handle examples that we're going to
consider during lecture.
So here,
I have a CodeSkulptor window sitting, and
it's got the example we're
going to consider here.
This is actually the completed example,
I'm going to walk through it and
fill in all the Python expressions
dynamically, so you can see how I do it.
But the critical thing is, we're going to
make that file available to you.
It's going to, in the break
between this segment of video and
the next, we're going to pop up
a URL that you can click on, and
it will take you to this
file inside CodeSkulptor.
And you can kind of see up here, there's
actually a naming convention we have.
It's always codeskulptor.org, and
we put a hash mark with examples.
And then afterwards,
we'll have the lecture name.py.
Now you don't have to remember that,
but then go up here,
you can click on it, pull it up.
And you can play around with
it either during the video or
after the video is over.
All right, let's talk about numbers and
arithmetic expressions.
So to begin, let's just dive right in and
have Python pronounce some numbers.
So let's print 3, and -1, and
3.14159, maybe -2.8.
So if I hit run here, sure enough,
out come those numbers.
Now the thing to notice that in Python,
there are actually two types of numbers,
they're kind of signed whole numbers,
things like 3 and -1.
And then there are decimal numbers that
are kind of have fractional parts and
always have kind of a decimal point here.
And in Python, those signed whole numbers
are called ints, for integers, and
kind of the decimal numbers are called
floats for floating point numbers.
And if you are ever in any doubt about
kind of, what kind of number you're
working with, there is a function in
Python that can actually tell you kind of
what type of number you're working with,
it's called type.
So I could say type(3) or
maybe type(3.14159), if I run that,
well, I'm going to guess this is an int,
and this is a float.
Let's run it, sure enough,
it's an int, this is a float.
Now here's a little trickier test, what
happens if we ask for the type of 3.0?
Now if you look at it, really,
this is really a whole number, but
somehow it's kind of got
this 0 fractional part.
So in Python, this is going to be a float.
In fact, the way we're going to know we're
working with a float is we always have
a decimal point here, a .0.
Now there's some functions that we can use
to move back and forth between ints and
floats, and they're not too complicated.
In fact,
they're just the function int and float.
So I can convert something
that is a floating point
number into an integer
in the following manner.
And so, these are going to
return back some integers and
kind of what integer are we
always going to get?
Well, the rule is,
we're always going to get the whole
part of this decimal number here.
So we're just going to throw away the part
to the right of the decimal point.
We can also go through and
convert an integer into a float.
That, again, seems kind of crazy because,
well, an integer kind of
is a decimal number.
But what you're going to see is the way
Python represents this is, well,
it's going to simply put .0 here.
Okay, so when you see 3.0,
that's really telling you this is a float,
-1.0, that's a float.
Now, before we move on to talk
about arithmetic operations,
let me give you a few words of wisdom
about dealing with floating point numbers.
Floating point numbers are only
an approximation to a decimal number.
For example, when you do 1 divided by 3,
you expect a decimal representation of
something like 0.33333333,
where the 3 repeats forever.
Computers are not really great at
representing that kind of information.
In fact,
a number like pi doesn't even have kind
of even a nice repeating representation.
There's a famous episode of Star Trek
where Mr. Spock calms a rebellious
computer by asking the computer to compute
the value of pi to the last decimal digit.
And the computer whirs off and
goes into an infinite loop,
desperately trying to
compute the last digit of pi.
People have built a computer taking this
class, they have a time out here or there.
But the critical question is kind
of what goes on inside Python,
whenever you give it a number
that has lot of digits.
What does Python do?
So let me show you kind of two examples
real quick here to help you understand.
So what I've gone out to have done is
I've actually grabbed two really good
approximations for pi and
the square root of 2, so here I have,
this is kind of a 50 digit
approximation of pi.
And then I've also gone and
I've grabbed a 50 digit approximation
to the square root of 2.
So I'm going to actually ask Python now
to print these out, and when you do that,
notice that I lost a lot of digits here.
All these digits here
kind of got trimmed down.
All these digits here got trimmed down.
So what happens inside Python is they
represent floating point numbers of about
15 decimal digits of accuracy.
So anything beyond that gets thrown away.
So in particular, occasionally, when
you're doing arithmetic operations using
floating point numbers,
you're going to get answers of the form,
4 point and a bunch of 0s and
then maybe a 3 at the end.
What you're seeing here is something
called floating point error.
Whereas Python is doing the computation,
it can't do the exact precise
operation that you're specifying.
It can't compute pi to
the last decimal point or
one-third to the last decimal point.
So it has to do some approximation.
So you're seeing that approximation
error there inside that computation.
All right,
we talked about numbers in Python.
Let's talk about the arithmetic
operators that you have available to do
computations in Python.
Here's a list of kind of some of
the bare basic arithmetic operators.
We have plus, minus,
times, division, power.
It's fairly straightforward.
We just take two numbers and
apply the operator to them,
so we can say something like 1+2, or
3-4, or 5*6, or 2 to the 5th power.
And if we run that, out comes 3-1,
30, and to the 5th is 32.
One operator that you should pay
attention to in Python is division.
So, the way the division operator
works in Python 2 is different
than the way it works in Python 3.
In Python 2, if one of the operators is a
floating point number, then the result of
division is also a floating point number,
and it approximates the actual division.
So, for example,
I could say print 1.0/3,
or 5.0/2.0, or
-7/3.0.
And what would come out when I
run that is what I'd expect,
kind of a decimal approximation of 1/3,
5/2, and kind of -7/3.
Notice if both the operators
are actually integers, well,
Python returns kind of the integer
version of the answer.
And that particular case is kind of
the next lowest integer after you do
the exact division.
So for example, if I say print 1/3,
5/2, -7/3,
we run that, the answer comes out to be,
well, one integer divided by 3 is 0.
We kind of round it down.
2.5, well, let's see, 5/2,
integer answer would be 2 here.
We kind of rounded 2.5 down.
We do -7/3, well,
integer division is actually -1/3.
I'm actually talk about division more
later on when we talk about remainders,
and we'll have a second operator called
//, is explicitly integer division.
All right, we know about numbers,
we know about arithmetic operators.
Now we're ready to build
arithmetic expressions.
So, the idea is fairly simple.
An arithmetic expression
is either a number, or
it's an arithmetic operator applied
to two arithmetic expressions.
Just kind of our first example
of kind of recursive definition.
So, for example,
2 is an arithmetic expression, 2+3,
it's an arithmetic expression
because we've applied the plus
operator to two arithmetic expressions,
2 and 3.
Now in practice, you don't even really
need to understand that definition.
You can just simply go through and
type in expressions that you're used to
using from, say, middle school algebra.
So I could say 1 + 2 * 3,
or 4.0- 5.0 / 6.0,
or 7 * 8 + 9 * 10.
And if I hit run,
what comes out is exactly what I'd expect.
Now you might kind of say, well,
how did I go from this definition kind
of involving an arithmetic expression.
It's an arithmetic expression
combined with operators,
to this thing that I just typed in that's
just kind of this flat expression mean.
I typed in 1 + 2 * 3, so somehow,
Python knew that this was really 1 +,
then 2 * 3.
It turns out there's this
notion of precedence, and
you probably studied this
in middle school algebra.
And in fact, you probably have a mnemonic
you learned at one point, maybe remember,
which was,
please excuse my dear aunt Sally.
So, the first letter of that phrase,
of each word in that phrase,
gives us the order in which
we should do operations,
when we're taking kind of this linear
version of an expression trying to think
about it in terms of this
kind of recursive definition.
So it says that when we're
evaluating expressions,
we should alway do parentheses first.
And then after that,
we should always do exponentiation next.
Then we should go through and
do multiplication and division, m and d.
And in fact, those have equal precedence.
So if we have a sequence of those,
we just do them from left to right.
And then finally, we do addition and
subtraction last.
So for example,
let's type in an expression here,
say, print 1 * 2, 1 * 2 + 3 * 4.
And if you look at that,
the rules of precedence say that we
should do multiplication before addition.
So this is really
the same thing as 2 + 12.
So if I run that, sure enough,
I get 14 back from both of them.
And notice, here's kind of the real rule,
which is if you're in doubt about
the order in which operations take place,
you can always just go through and
use parentheses.
So for example,
if I wanted to do that 2 + 3 first,
I can say 1 + 1 * (2 + 3) * 4.
And that should be the same
thing as 1 * 5 * 4.
And sure enough,
these both evaluate to 20.
So in practice,
working with arithmetic expressions
inside Python is very intuitive.
It's really what you learned
in middle school algebra.
So I don't think you'll find
anything real too tricky here.
So go ahead and take a shot at it.